# The meaning of *ghusl* and it's rules

## 1. Meaning and Rules

### Meaning

Flowing of water on all the body

### Rules

The rules in *Islam* is for cleanliness in the case of lifting ritual impurity (*hadath*) or removal of impurities (*najasa*). When it comes the rules of the *shariah*, it depends on the situation. In some situations, it is obligatory, in others, it is *sunnah*, and in others, it is *mustahab*.

### The proofs regarding this are as follows:

- From the *koran* (5:6): `وَإِن كُنتُمْ جُنُبًا فَٱطَّهَّرُوا۟ ۚ`

- From the *sunnah*:

  *Samurah bin Junbin* may God be pleased with him, said:

  > The prophet (ﷺ) said:
  >
  > > Whoever performs ablution on the day of *Jummah*, that is good and whoever takes a bath, that is better.

## 2. Wisdom

  - Obedience to God and to His messenger (ﷺ) include commands that include purification
  - Removal of obstacles between a servant and God most High in the prayer like major ritual impurity
  - Cleanliness of the body from physical or figurative impuritites.
  - Following the natural disposition of the human being towards purity and love of purity
  - One's physical appearance in front of people should be suitable and noble and one should remove in one what chases away or scares people.

## 3. How to perform the ritual bath

  ### The obligatory actions

  They are three

  1. Rinsing: washing the whole mouth. It is sufficient to drink in big gulps (that is, filling the mouth with water and then, swallow) because spitting water is not a condition.
  
  2. Sniffing water up the nostrils
  
  3. Making water flow over the whole body: It is required to wash all body parts that do not incur any difficulty, namely, the ears, the navel, the moustache, the eyebrows, the beard, the hair, the head and the haircloth (if present - one needs to make sure that water reachers the hair inside).
     Any part of the body that is difficult to wash is not incumbent, such as the eyes, blisters and small injuries. God most High has lifted difficulty by saying: 
  
     > Al Hajj: 78

  ### The sunnah actions

  1. The intention.
  2. Saying the *bismillah* at the beginning of the bath.
  3. Washing the hands three times.
  4. Washing the private parts whether or not it contains impurities.
  5. Washing the body from impurities if present to prevent spreading at the beginning of the bath. Here, the *sunnah* action relates to the timing of this action because the action itself is obligatory (to remove impurities from the body) but it taking place at the beginning is *sunnah*.
  6. Performing a complete ablution: One should delay the washing of the feet if one is performing the bath in a place where water stagnates
  7. Ensuring that water goes over the whole body three times, beginning with the head and then each side, starting with the right first.

  The proof for this method is shown by this narration:

  > *Ibn Abbas* (may God be pleased with him) said: 
  >
  > > My aunt *Maymunah* (may God be pleased with her) told me:
  > >
  > > > I came close to the messenger of God (ﷺ) while he was having a bath from major ritual impurity. He washed his two hands two or three times. Then, he placed his right hand in the water container and poured water on his private parts while washing with his left hand. Then he hit the earth with his left hand and rubbed it strongly. Then, he performed an ablution, similar to the one for praying. Then, he poured water on his head three times using water from the palm of his hand. Then, he washed the rest of his body. Then, he moved to another place to wash his legs. Then, he put his head scarf back on.

  ### The general rules

  1. Not letting anything appear from one’s awrah when one is performing the ritual bath in the presence of other people who are not from one’s immediate family (This was common in the days of public baths when houses did not have a bathroom area). If this is not possible or difficult to achieve, one should delay the ritual bath and perform tayamum until the ritual bath is possible with covering one’s awrah.
     Definition of awrah:
     
     - Awrah of a man around men: From the navel to the knees.
     
     - Awrah of a man around women: From the navel to the knees.
     
     - Awrah of a woman around men not from the immediate family: The whole body except the face and the hands as long as the latter do not cause desire. If they do cause desire, then the face and the hands are also not allowed.
     
     - Awrah of a woman around people who are mahram to her or other muslim women (non-muslim women are treated as men who are not from the immediate family): From the navel to the knees.
       [mention about the generality of حمام in ghusl context referring to « public baths » and how this can be extrapolated nowadays to public pools and the issue of pools with mixed genders and segregated pools that muslim and non-muslim might share and the point that non-muslim women are considered as men when it comes to awra in front of them]
       
       Jabir (may God be pleased in him) reported that the prophet (ﷺ) said:
     
       > « Whoever believes in God and the last day, do not enter the bathroom (public bath - at that time, there were no bathrooms in the homes and when the muslims conquered the lands of civilized nations like the Romans, public bathrooms were the norm) without a loincloth. Whoever believes in God and the last day, do not let your wife enter the bathroom (public bath - in general, these did not have separation for men and women and even if there were specific hours for each gender, it was not strictly controled. Therefore this ruling applies to public baths that are mixed gender or do not have a strict control). Whoever believes in God and the last day, do not sit at a table where wine or alcohol is circulated. »
       
       Abdullah bin Umar (may God be pleased in him) reported that the prophet (ﷺ) said:
       >
       >  « Verily, the land of the non-Arabs will be opened for you and you will find there buildings which are referred to as public baths. The men should not enter these public baths without a loincloth. The women are not allowed to enter except if sick or in menstruation »»
     
  2. A covering is prescribed when one is performing the ritual bath even when alone. According to Ya’la:

     > Verily, the prophet (ﷺ) saw a man have the ritual bath to clean himself from excrement without a loincloth. Then, he climbed the pulpit, praised God most High and said: « Verily, God most High is ever living and He loves humility and covering. If you perform the bath alone, cover yourself. »

  3. Leave urine in stagnant water (and perform the bath in a different place - this applies only if the water is not flowing or does not have a drain) According to Abdullah ibn Mughafal:

     > Verily, the prophet (ﷺ) prevented people from discharging urine where he has a bath. He said: « Indeed, the common wicked thoughts are from this. »

## 4. Types of Ghusl

There are two types: Situations where Ghusl is obigatory and situations where Ghusl is sunnah.

#### Obligatory Ghusl

1. Meaning: Situations where it is obligatory and the proof for its performance is without any doubt
2. These situations are major ritual impurity, menstruation, childbirth, death

##### Major Ritual Impurity

From the verse 6 of chapter Al-Mai’dah of the Koran, 

```
وَإِن كُنتُمْ جُنُبًا فَٱطَّهَّرُوا۟
```

Translated by Yusuf Ali, « If ye are in a state of ceremonial impurity, bathe your whole body. »

Linguistically, major ritual impurity means the exit of sperm due to sexual desire.

###### Possible causes for major ritual impurity

1. Exit of sperm with desire for any reason such as due to sexual maturity (wet dream).
   It was reported from Said al Khudri (may God be pleased with him):

   > I left with the messenger (ﷺ) on Monday to Quba until we were with the tribe of Bani Salam. The prophet (ﷺ) stopped at the door of Itban and called him and he came out as he was tugging his loincloth. The prophet (ﷺ) said: « Hurry up, man ». Itban replied: « O messenger of God (ﷺ), if a man comes quickly on his woman but does not ejaculate, what is his state? » The prophet (ﷺ) said, « Verily, water is from fluid », in other words, ghusl is obligatory only if there is exit of sperm. [This was abrograted later on]

2. Sexual intercourse without ejaculation. It was reported by Aishah (may God be pleased with her) that she said:

   > If the private parts meet, it is obligatory to perform ghusl. This happened to me and the prophet (ﷺ) and we both performed ghusl.

###### What is impermissible when in a state of major ritual impurity

- Prayer, whether obligatory or sunnah. God most High said, « Al Nisa: 43 »

- Circumbulation around the Kabah (Tawaf), whether obligatory or sunnah. Ibn Abas reported that the prophet (ﷺ) said:

  > Tawaf around the house is like prayer except that you are allowed to speak in it. Whoever speaks in it, he should only speak the good

  Tawaf can only be performed inside the mosque.

- Touching the Koran if needed, unless one uses a detached connection or by the means of a cloth. God most High said, « Waqiah: 79 ». Similarly to the Koran, touching of verses written on a board, paper or table, is forbidden.

- Entering the mosque if one is passing through except if one is a traveller. God most High said, « Al Nisa: 34 » What is meant by abiri al sabil is a traveller. Abu Dawud reported that Aisha said:

  > The prophet (ﷺ) came while the front of the houses of the companions and it’s paths were inside the mosque and he said, « Turn these houses away from the mosque » Thereafter, the prophet (ﷺ) entered

- Reading the Koran even if it’s one verse: Abdullah ibn Salamah said: 

  > I entered with two men, one from our tribe and one from Bani Asad, in a place where Ali (may God be pleased with him) was ... Then, he asked for water and one of them gave him a handful with which he wiped himself. Then, he started to read the Koran and they prevented him to do so and he said, « Verily, the messenger (ﷺ) used to come out of the washroom, then read the Koran to us and eat meat with us while he was not in a state of major ritual impurity» or he said, « Read anything from the Koran when you are not in a state of major ritual impurity »

  Umar (may God be pleased with him) said, « He used to hate reading the Koran while he was in a state of major ritual impurity ».

  This does not apply to the reading of the Koran for the purpose of remembrance such as « Al Zuhruf 13 » and « Al Baqarah 156 »

  It is not a problem to look in the noble Koran when in a state of ritual impurity if it does not involve touching or reading

##### Menstruation

##### Childbirth

##### Death

